# IJWF Article Analysis Files 

These are the STATA files associated with the International Journal of Wildland Fire article titled, "Understanding Homeowners’ Decisions to Mitigate Wildfire Risk and Create Defensible Space: Evidence from Nevada". This analysis used Probit regression models to determine the underlying motivators behind a homeowners' decision to create and maintain defensible space in Nevada. 

### Abstract 

This article analyzes homeowners’ decisions to undertake fire-safe investments and create defensible space on their property using a unique data set from 35 wildland-urban interface communities in Nevada. The data set combines homeowner information from a mail survey with their observed fire-safe investments obtained through parcel-level hazard assessments. We find that homeowners’ self-reported mitigation expenditures are driven by their subjective beliefs about their wildfire risk, while observed defensible space status is driven by their costs of investment. We develop a theoretical model of a homeowner’s fire-safe investment decision that accounts for our empirical results.

### Background

Escalating wildfire damages and suppression costs in residential communities adjacent to wildlands has emerged as a significant policy issue in the United States (Kent et al. 2003; Bracmort 2014). Wildfires in wildland-urban interface (WUI) communities are more difficult and costly to suppress (Cohen 2000), more likely to result in structure loss (Radeloff et al 2005), and more frequent due to human-caused ignitions than fires in wildlands (Cardille et al. 2001; Chas-Amil et al 2015; Syphard 2007; Cohen 2010). The escalation in these costs is due to the overall increase in wildfire activity (NIFC 2017), as well as the continued rapid growth of the WUI. Over two thirds of new homes build in the United States between 2000 and 2010 where in the WUI (Haldane 2013). A sizable portion of WUI homes are threatened by wildfire. In the decade from 2001-2010, 44.9% of WUI residents comprising 6.3% of the total U.S. population (17.5 million people) lived WUI communities that were threatened by identified wildfires (Thomas and Butry 2014). These threatened WUI communities contained 7.3% residential and commercial buildings in the United States (7.8 million structures).

To address the threat from wildfire, WUI communities across the United States have enacted policies to promote voluntary fire-safe investment by homeowners on their private property (Crow et al. 2015). Homeowners can undertake a number of fire-safe investments to reduce the risk that their home will be destroyed in a wildfire (defined in this article as homeowners’ wildfire risk). These fire-safe investments include the use of fire-resistant building materials and the creation and maintenance of defensible space in the area surrounding their homes. A key question for the design of these voluntary policies is whether they should focus on educating homeowners about the benefits of fire-safe investment in terms of reducing their wildfire risk or instead focus on subsidizing homeowners’ costs investment (Meldrum et al. 2014). This article addresses this question using a unique data set from 35 WUI communities in Nevada that matches homeowners’ responses to a mail survey with information on their observed fire-safe investments from parcel-level hazard assessments. The analysis considers whether homeowners’ observed fire-safe investments are driven primarily by their benefits or costs of investment.

The analysis in this article has two parts. First, we develop a theoretical model that describes the determinants of homeowners’ private utility from their fire-safe investments. We show that homeowners’ benefits from a fire-safe investment are determined by their financial losses in the event of a wildfire, their wildfire risk, and the effectiveness of the investment at reducing their wildfire risk, while the costs include both financial costs and costs related to losses in landscape aesthetics and privacy. This taxonomy of benefits and costs informs the development of our empirical model. The theoretical model also describes how defensible space is the product of several individual fire-safe investments and that failure to attain adequate defensible space only requires insufficient outlay in one investment category. These features of defensible space imply that a homeowner's decision to create defensible space is likely to be driven by different factors than their decision to undertake a generic fire-safe investment. This insight informs our decision to develop separate empirical models for homeowners’ fire-safe investment and defensible space decisions and helps us interpret our empirical results. 

In the second part, we estimate empirical models for our two observed fire-safe investment outcomes for each homeowner: whether they reported investing money or time to reduce their wildfire risk in the previous year (from the survey) and whether or not they had adequate defensible space on their property (from the hazard assessments). The survey data allows us to include the components of homeowners’ benefits and costs from their fire-safe investment identified in the theoretical model. The survey data also allows us to explore whether homeowners' attitudes towards financial risk explain their observed fire-safe investments. The survey presents homeowners with a hypothetical gamble over their lifetime. This information allows us to impute cardinal measures of risk aversion for every homeowner in our sample. While measures of risk aversion constructed using this procedure have been shown to explain the risk profile of investors’ financial portfolios (see Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro 2008; Addoum 2017), this is the first study, to our knowledge, to use these risk aversion proxies to examine private investment to mitigate natural disaster risk.

This article makes four contributions to the literature. First, we are able to analyze how a rich set of co-variates for each homeowner obtained from the mail survey explain their observed (rather than self-reported) fire-safe investments. Previous studies have relied on data from either surveys/in-person interviews (Bright and Burtz 2006; Talberth et al. 2006; Brenkert-Smith, Champ, and Flores 2012) or parcel-level hazard assessments (Shafran 2008), but have not combined data from these two sources. Second, previous studies have generally focused on a small number of forested communities (e.g., Martin et al. 2009; McCaffrey et al. 2011). In contrast, our sample includes WUI homeowners from 35 communities in four predominant vegetation types (grassland, sagebrush rangeland, pinyon pine and juniper woodlands, and mixed-conifer alpine forest). Third, our theoretical model and empirical analysis illuminates the important differences between the determinants of homeowners’ decision to undertake a given fire-safe investment and their decision to create defensible space. These differences have not been recognized in the previous literature. Forth, we are the first study to investigate whether homeowners' attitudes towards financial risk explain their observed fire-safe investments using a widely-used measures of homeowner risk aversion.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 develops a theoretical model of a homeowner's fire-safe investment decision. Second 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents and discusses the empirical results. Second 5 discusses the implications of the results for wildland fire policy in WUI communities, as well as directions for future research.

